| ©2023 by COMAP, Inc. | www.comap.com | www.mathmodels.org | info@comap.com |
2023 ICM
Problem E: Light Pollution 
Photo Credit: K. Blyman 
Background 
Light pollution is used to describe any excessive or poor use of artificial light. Some of the 
phenomena that we refer to as light pollution include light trespass, over-illumination, and 
light clutter. These phenomena are most easily observed as a glow in the sky after the sun has 
set in large cities; however, they may also occur in more remote regions. 
Light pollution alters our view of the night sky, has environmental impacts and affects our health 
and safety. For example, plant maturation may be delayed or accelerated, and migration patterns 
of wildlife affected. Excessive artificial light may confuse our circadian rhythms, leading to 
poor sleep quality and perhaps physical and mental health issues. Glare caused by artificial 
lights may contribute to some motor vehicle accidents. 
Community officials or local groups may implement intervention strategies to mitigate the 
negative effects of light pollution. Artificial light, however, has both positive and negative 
effects that impact different locations in different ways. For example, to avoid the negative 
impacts of light pollution listed above, some communities opt for low-light neighborhoods which 
in turn might lead to increased crime. The impacts of light pollution may depend on factors such 
as the location’s level of development, population, biodiversity, geography, and climate. 
Therefore, assessing the extent of the effects and the potential impacts of any intervention 
strategies must be tailored to a specific location. 
Requirement
COMAP’s Illumination Control Mission (ICM) is working to promote awareness of the impacts 
of light pollution and develop intervention strategies to mitigate those impacts. In support of this 
ICM work, your task is to address measuring and mitigating the effects of light pollution in 
various locations, incorporating both human and non-human concerns. Specifically, you should: 
 Develop a broadly applicable metric to identify the light pollution risk level of a location. 
 Apply your metric and interpret its results on the following four diverse types of 
locations: 
o a protected land location, 
o a rural community, 
o a suburban community, and 
o an urban community.
| ©2023 by COMAP, Inc. | www.comap.com | www.mathmodels.org | info@comap.com |
 Describe three possible intervention strategies to address light pollution. Discuss specific 
actions to implement each strategy and the potential impacts of these actions on the 
effects of light pollution in general. 
 Choose two of your locations and use your metric to determine which of your 
intervention strategies is most effective for each of them. Discuss how the chosen 
intervention strategy impacts the risk level for the location. 
 Finally, for one of your identified locations and its most-effective intervention strategy, 
produce a 1-page flyer to promote the strategy for that location. 
Your PDF solution of no more than 25 total pages should include: 
 One-page Summary Sheet. 
 Table of Contents. 
 Your complete solution. 
 One-page promotion flyer. 
 Reference List. 
Note: The ICM Contest has a 25-page limit. All aspects of your submission count toward the 
25-page limit (Summary Sheet, Table of Contents, Report, One-page promotion flyer, Reference 
List, and any Appendices). You must cite the sources for your ideas, images, and any other 
materials used in your report. 
Glossary
Artificial Light: Any non-naturally occurring source of light. 
Circadian Rhythms: The natural 24-hour sleep-wake cycle on which humans and other 
organisms operate. 
Glare: Excessive brightness that decreases one’s ability to see. 
Intervention Strategies: Policies and/or actions that could be taken to disrupt the negative 
impacts of light pollution. 
Light Clutter: Excessive grouping of lights. 
Light Trespass: When light enters unintended areas. 
Over-Illumination: Lighting at an intensity higher than what is needed for an activity or 
location. 
Protected Land: Areas that governments or private entities protect from development due to 
their ecological, cultural, and/or natural importance. 
Rural Community: A community located in one of the least densely populated parts of a 
country or region, and not easily accessible from an urban community. 
Suburban Community: A community located in a moderately densely populated part of a 
country or region, or easily accessible from an urban community. 
Urban Community: A community located in one of the most densely populated parts of a 
country or region. 
